Add blog post about the new CA tree-based ordered_set (#16)
erlang/erlang.github.io: _posts/2020-8-17-the-new-scalable-ets-ordered_set.md

---
layout: post
title: The New Scalable ETS ordered_set
tags: ETS ordered_set scalability CA tree
author: Kjell Winblad
---

The scalability of ETS tables of type `ordered_set` with the
`write_concurrency` option is substantially better in Erlang/OTP 22
than earlier releases. In some extreme cases, you can expect
more than 100 times better throughput in Erlang/OTP 22 compared to
Erlang/OTP 21. The cause of this improvement is a new data structure
called [the contention adapting search tree][jpdc_ca_tree] (CA tree
for short). This blog post will give you insights into how the CA tree
works and show you benchmark results comparing the performance of ETS
`ordered_set` tables in OTP 21 and OTP 22.

## Try it Out!

[This escript](/code/insert_disjoint_ranges.erl) makes it convenient for you
to try the new `ordered_set` implementation on your own machine with
Erlang/OTP 22+ installed.

The escript measures the time it takes for `P` Erlang processes to
insert `N` integers into an `ordered_set` ETS table, where `P` and `N`
are parameters to the escript. The CA tree is only utilized when the

> ETS table options `ordred_set` and `{write_concurrency, true}` are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ETS table options `ordered_set` and `{write_concurrency, true}` are
```

active. One can, therefore, easily compare the new data structure's
performance with the old one (an [AVL tree][AVLTree] protected by a
single readers-writer lock). The `write_concurrency` option had no
effect on `ordered_set` tables before the release of Erlang/OTP 22.

> I got the following results when I ran the escript on my laptop with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We get the following results when running the escript on a developer laptop with
```
Aligning with the pronoun usage throughout the text

two cores (Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7500U CPU @ 2.70GHz):

{% highlight console %}

$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl old 1 10000000
Time: 3.352332 seconds
$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl old 2 10000000
Time: 3.961732 seconds
$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl old 4 10000000
Time: 6.382199 seconds
$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl new 1 10000000
Time: 3.832119 seconds
$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl new 2 10000000
Time: 2.109476 seconds
$ escript insert_disjoint_ranges.erl new 4 10000000
Time: 1.66509 seconds

{% endhighlight %}

We see that in this particular benchmark, the CA tree has superior
scalability to the old data structure. The benchmark ran about twice
as fast with the new data structure and four processes as with the old

> data structure and one process (remember that the machine only has two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data structure and one process (the machine only has two
```
Can't "remember" since it was never pointed out before

   counter may eventually reach the threshold that indicates that the
   base node should be split. A base node split divides the items in a
   base node between two new base nodes and replaces the original base
   node with a routing node where the two new base nodes are
   rooted. The following picture shows the CA tree after the base node
   pointed to by the tree's root has been split:
   
   
   ![alt text](/images/ca_tree/ca_tree_2.png "First Split Contention Adapting Search Tree")
3. The process of base node splitting will continue as long as there
   is enough contention in base node locks or until the max depth of the
   routing layer is reached. The following picture shows how the CA
   tree looks like after another split:
   
   
   ![alt text](/images/ca_tree/ca_tree_3.png "Second Split Contention Adapting Search Tree")
4. The synchronization granularity may differ in different parts of a
   CA tree if, for example, a particular part of a CA tree is accessed
   more frequently in parallel than the rest. The following picture
   shows the CA tree after yet another split:
   
   
   ![alt text](/images/ca_tree/ca_tree_4.png "Third Split Contention Adapting Search Tree")

> 5. The following picture shows the CA tree after the forth split:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The following picture shows the CA tree after the fourth split:
```

   a join will be triggered after an operation sees that a base
   node counter's value is below a certain threshold. Remember that a
   base node's counter is decreased if a thread does not experience
   contention when acquiring the base node's lock.
   <!--The conters The likelihood that
   a join will be triggered in a certain base node gets higher when
   the probablity of contention that does not detect contention in the
   base node lock is high. The likelihood that two base nodes are
   joined is also increased if operations that require both base nodes
   happens often enough (to reduce the overhead of acquiring locks).-->
   
   ![alt text](/images/ca_tree/ca_tree_7.png "Join of two base nodes in a  Contention Adapting Search Tree")
8. As you might have noticed from the illustrations above, splitting
   and joining results in that old base nodes and
   routing nodes gets spliced-out from the tree. The memory that these
   nodes occupy needs to be reclaimed, but this can not happen directly
   after they have got spliced-out as some threads might still be
   reading them. The Erlang run-time system has a mechanism called
   [delayed

>    dealloc](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/d6285b0a347b9489ce939511ee9a979acd868f71/erts/emulator/internal_doc/DelayedDealloc.md),

Reviewer 2: It's the "thread progress" mechanism that is used here to schedule deallocation jobs at a safe time.
"Delayed dealloc" is the allocator internal mechanism that sends back deallocation jobs to the thread that did the allocation. The word "delayed" can be misleading as that's not the purpose but rather a side effect.

Author: Thanks for the clarification! I have changed "delayed dealloc" in the text to "thread progress" and the link so that it points to the internal documentation for thread progress in the commit below.
